How much of your time as an entrepreneur or member of a young company should be focused on acquiring customers versus developing your product or service?
	According to Gabriel Weinberg and Justin Mares , the answer is 50% split time evenly between building your product or service and bringing in new customers for it. That's their argument in Traction: A Startup Guide to Getting Customers, a book based on Weinberg's experience as the CEO and founder of search engine DuckDuckGo and Mares' time as the director of revenue at error tracking app maker Exceptional Cloud Services. On top of their own stories, they highlight best practices from dozens of successful founders and marketers who are masters at a specific customer acquisition channel, such as email marketing, sales or search engine optimization. Traction: A Startup Guide to Getting Customers Traction lays out a logical progression that any startup can follow to start testing and experimenting with new traction channels and hopefully find new sources of customers. It's so useful that at Zapier we're using the Traction framework (which this post will outline soon) to guide our thinking around growth in 2015. At the core of the methodology in Traction is the notion of "traction thinking" and "traction testing."
	Traction thinking means that, as mentioned before, you should be spending 50% of your time on the product and 50% of your time on traction. Anything less and you risk not spending enough effort getting new customers and overbuilding without sufficient user feedback. But you can't pursue anything and everything. You have to spend effort only on the traction channels and activities that move the needle for your business, and these will vary by company. To do this, you need to always be "traction testing." Traction testing is the process by which you identify a possible new opportunity in one channel, spend a small amount of money (or none) to see if that channel could return good results for your business, and then based on that test either invest more or move on. "The faster you run high-quality experiments, the more likely you'll find scalable, effective growth tactics," says marketer and entrepreneur Sean Ellis in Traction. "Determining the success of a customer acquisition idea is dependent on an effective tracking and reporting system, so don't start testing until your tracking/ reporting system has been implemented." Sean Ellis, founder of Qualaroo
	To know how well these different tests are doing, you need to be dedicated to tracking everything that you can. Only by knowing exactly how well a given channel is performing can you optimize around it. To do so, be sure to not only turn to the free Google Analytics tool, but take advantage of advanced products like Kissmetrics , Mixpanel , or Heap , as well. Once you're in the mindset of thinking about traction as much as product, and have the tools in place to see how your tests are performing, you can start applying the Traction methodology to your business. This post offers descriptions and examples of the 19 customer acquisition channels identified by Weinberg and Mares in Traction and then provides an overview of the authors' "Bullseye Framework", their systematic way to test which channel is best for you. We hope it's helpful to get you started, but to really dig into it, you'll want to pick up your own copy of Traction , which is available via print, ebook or audio. As you read through the below traction channels identified by Weinberg and Mares, think about ways you could use them in your business. Don't quickly dismiss any of them as channels that wouldn't work for you, the authors warn; take the time to think about creative ways each could be applied. In some cases, the traction channel you think won't work is in reality likely a big opportunity because your competitors are thinking the same thing. Viral marketing is a process where your users and customers bring you new users and customers, without you having to advertise or market to those new users. There are many ways this can happen:
	Word of Mouth - Users and customers simply tell their friends about you Inherent Virality - User value increases when their friends sign up (e.g. Facebook, Instagram, or WhatAapp) Collaboration - Products benefit from having other users on them you can work with (e.g. Trello , Podio , or Asana ) Communication - The product is meant for communicating, so you need the people you communicate with to use it (e.g. Slack , Skype , or Telegram ) Incentives - Your users can earn rewards by getting their friends to sign up (e.g. Dropbox , Gilt , or Lyft )
	Embedding - Your product can be embedded on other people's sites, so new users are exposed to it (e.g. Wistia , Typeform , or Disqus ) The ability of a product to go viral is dependent upon the "Viral Loop." The loop is a combination of the speed and effectiveness of your users going through a three-step process: The user finds or starts using your product The user tells their friends about it, or invites them to use it These new users begin using your product, and the process repeats
	And your effectiveness in making this loop happen can be judged by your "viral coefficient." The coefficient is a measure of how many other users you can expect one new user to bring. So a viral coefficient of 1 means that each new user will bring on an additional user, and that additional user will bring another additional user, and so on. To calculate it, you can take your viral mechanism and assess how well it converts for an average user. So, for example, say you give users invitations they can send to their friends. By tracking the number of sent invitations, and dividing that by the number of people who join from invitations, you can measure the viral coefficient for invitations. Let's say that in a given week, 200 users send out 1,000 invitations, and that 333 new users join from invitations. Your signup conversion ratio is 1,000/333 or .33, and your rate of referral is 1,000/200, so 5. Multiply the two together (5 x .33) and you get 1.65, your viral coefficient. To boost this, you can focus either on the conversion percentage (how many sign up from invitations), or on the rate of referral (how many invitations a given user sends out). Weinberg and Mares provide a number of ideas for doing this in the book. The second channel is to get traction through being talked about in the media. Public relations is the practice of reaching out to magazines, newspapers, blogs, and other media outlets to have them feature a story about your company or product.
	When you reach out to a media outlet, you're doing them a favor. You're giving them something to talk about, and possibly giving them the first go at a story. Reporters are constantly on deadline so if you can package a story that's easy for them to tell, they'll appreciate it. But how do you get to these publications? One method that's discussed in Traction is the strategy that marketer Ryan Holiday outlines in his Wall Street Journal bestselling book Trust Me, I'm Lying . The strategy is called "laddering up." You pitch some small blogs that are related to your niche, who will be most likely to write about you. Then you can take those stories, post them to popular sharing sites like Reddit or Hacker News, and if they perform there then they'll be likely to be picked up by larger blogs and media outlets who will contact you for more information (or, as Ryan points out, just re-hash the exact same article). Not sure how to reach out to these blogs? Weinberg and Mares provide some scripts as well as starting points in the book. There's also the flip side of typical public relations: "unconventional" PR. By unconventional they mean anything you could do that would result in a huge amount of publicity without you having to make an effort for it to spread, even if that publicity is negative.
	One example of this is the " Will it Blend? " video series run by blender manufacturer Blendtec. These short videos show a "scientist" in a lab coat holding anything from an iPad to a Nike sneaker to a video game peripheral, who then tests to see if it can be blended up in a Blendtec blender thus demonstrating how tough their product is. Spoiler: it usually can. These videos are relatively inexpensive to make, but they have a large following for their entertainment value. Their YouTube channel has over 750,000 subscribers, and some of their videos, like the one on the initial iPad , have millions of views. Or how about early last year when Old Spice created fake websites for things such as " Spray Tan Parties ," " Fat-to-Muscle Shirts ," and " Protein Cologne "? These sites went viral as people pranked their friends sharing them on Facebook, and it resulted in low-cost traffic and sales for Old Spice. Which raises the question: how can you do something outlandish that fits with your product to draw attention to it? How can you entertain, shock, or amuse while advertising at the same time? Google's Adwords is still the largest advertising network online, and if you can afford it, it's worth testing out. These are the ads that you see above and alongside search results, suggesting certain sites related to the keywords you plugged in that might not be the top ranked sites.
	This is especially useful if there are keywords you want to be associated with, but that you don't have the clout to show up for (yet). By buying ads on search engines, you can show up for those keywords now instead of having to wait until you've developed the credibility. If you're interested in getting started on Google, you can go to the Google Adwords site and sign up, and look at Bing Ads and Yahoo , as well. Google and the other search engines have competition though. Last year, the total spending on social advertising (such as on sites like Facebook and Twitter) grew 40% to over 8 billion dollars . The benefit of advertising on social networks is that it will let you target your ads with greater specificity than on Google or another search engine. You can refine your ads by certain demographics, interests, pages people have liked, and more, which you can't do on a search engine. Social ads are also a great opportunity for "retargeting," or showing ads to someone based on their activity on your site. Have you ever looked at a piece of clothing only to have it show up on Facebook? That's retargeting, and Facebook makes it easy to implement it.
	If you want to get started on social advertising, check out Facebook and Twitter's advertising hubs . You can also consider display ads, which are the banner ads that you see on other peoples' sites. Many of these are done through Google's Display Network , but there are also other platforms you can look at such as TribalFusion , Conversant , and Adblade . Offline advertising isn't dead yet, and with how much advertising has moved online, the offline options have gotten cheaper by comparison. The bad part about them is that it's harder to track exactly how well they're performing, but the good part is that if you know a few tricks you can get them really cheap. To take full advantage of this, look into "remnant advertising." This is ad space that is currently not being used or filled, such as ad space in a magazine close to its print date or an empty billboard. Novus Media , as Weinberg and Mares point out, is one example of a company that can help you find this unused ad space. Tracking is a little different in offline media. Instead of being able to use something like Google Analytics, you'll want to set up special URLs, coupon codes, or even phone numbers for the advertisements so you know where the traffic is coming from and you're able to measure it. Another simple option is to just ask your users or customers after they sign up how they found you.
	Good search engine optimization (SEO) means free traffic for your keywords, which in turn can mean a customer acquisition cost of zero or near zero. To do this, you need to figure out what types of things your ideal customers would be searching for. If you run a site selling products to help owners of small dogs keep their fur well kept, then maybe your customers are searching for "small dog brushing," "how do I keep my dogs fur soft," or even dog-specific searches such as "Shi-tzu fur maintenance." Once you have an idea of what terms you want to rank for, you need to create content related to those terms. So in this case you could have separate pages of your site with information about each of these problems, and how someone can best care for their small dog's fur at home. To make sure your page ranks for those keywords, you should use the keywords in the URL "slug" (everything after the .com/ ) as well as in the title or Heading 1 of the page. Also, whenever possible, get other sites to link to those pages as resources on their specified topics, which will tell Google that your pages are good sources of information and that they should rank highly. For a deeper look at search engine optimization, see " The Beginner's Guide to SEO " from Moz.
	Content marketing is the process of creating content that your users and customers would be interested in, distributing it for free or at low price, and then using that content to draw people to your site where they'll hopefully activate as new users or customers. There are variety of ways you can publish content, including: Blog posts related to your field Informational guides Videos explaining certain concepts or answering questions
	Downloadable ebooks or PDFs And it doesn't all have to be on your site. As Weinberg and Mares point out, the fastest way to grow in the beginning is to post your content on other peoples' sites with links back to yours, so that you leverage their audience to grow your own. To take advantage of this channel, you should identify what type of content will be most valuable to your target market, create a few pieces that they might be interested in, put them out in the world, and see how they perform. If one type works well, focus on that while you slowly test others, and continue optimizing as you go. Related: " 10 Content Strategies to Rapidly Build a Larger Audience " The stats show it: email is the most effective way to re-engage your existing users and customers.
	When someone signs up for your site or buys from you, their email address needs to be going into email marketing software like MailChimp or Campaign Monitor . Once they're there, you can let them know about new features, new products, or send them content that you've created that they might be interested in. That also means that when possible, your blog posts should be converting readers to email list signups. These readers are the people most likely to be interested in learning more about what you have to say, so take advantage of their interest. Don't sell too hard in your emails, balance them between useful information and calls to action. In some industries, it's fine to be more aggressive (e.g. eCommerce) since your customers expect it, but in other industries (e.g. if you sell an expensive paid course) you'll want to balance value and selling. Related: " Grow Your Email List: How to Get Subscribers, Organize Lists and Follow Spam Laws " Similar to content marketing, you can use engineering projects that provide value to your target market to draw new users or customers to your site.
	This is any web service, app, or free tool that offers value to your target market for little or no cost, while also tying in your product in a way that will be relevant to them either while their using the tool, or immediately after. Inbound marketing tool HubSpot , Weinberg and Mares point out, created a " Marketing Grader " on a separate URL from their main site where anyone can go to submit their website for review. HubSpot then looks over how you're doing on your marketing, and suggests ways you could improve it by using their tool. At the same time they have your email address from emailing you the report, so they can follow up with you with other offers you might be interested in. This is an example of a "micro-site" which you could create with your own tool to promote your product. Other forms of engineering as marketing are embeddable widgets (like Twitter's embeddable feeds), and annual promotions possibly tying in a micro-site. While it could fall under PR, targeting blogs deserves a special mention, as well. If you can build strong relationships with bloggers in your niche, then they'll be more likely to reference you and your product in their articles and be more open to letting you share your content to their audience. To get started, keep a list of all the blogs in your niche that you can find in a spreadsheet organized by size, and by whether or not you have a relationship with them. Reach out to the owners of the blogs with ideas for guest posts that their audience will enjoy, and as you build a reputation in that niche by posting on other peoples' sites you can move up the chain to more popular sites and blogs.
	Make sure you return the favor though. If a blog is letting you post on their site and they're talking about you, then you should make an effort to share your audience with them as well. This also helps when pitching new blogs--if you can demonstrate that you helped other sites increase their traffic then new sites will be more open to you reaching out to them. Business development is the process of establishing partnerships and agreements with other companies or startups to promote each others' products or services. You could do a combined sale, share ad space, or find ways to combine your products. You could also establish integrations between your product and another, which is what we do at Zapier . When a new web service integrates with Zapier (so that their service can be used for automations with other services), they get featured on our blog and we drive traffic to their tool through suggested integrations for our user base. In return, many of our partners feature Zapier in the integrations section of their site to let their users know that they can use us to connect with other services. It's a partnership where both parties benefit without having to incur any major costs. When possible, you should look at other companies in your space or a tangential space to see if a similar agreement could be made.
	If you have a high cost product, or a piece of enterprise software, then direct sales may be a strong traction channel for you. Sales is the process of directly reaching out to potential customers or answering incoming inquiries, in order to convince them to buy your product either now or in the future. It's based on a three-step process: Generate leads, which you do by looking for people who are decision makers in a company that might be interested in buying your product or service, or giving people the opportunity to opt in to your sales funnel through a free trial on your site. Qualify leads, which you can do by assessing how much they're using a trial version of your product, how interested they seem in an initial conversation, and how strong of a fit your offering is for their problem. Close leads, which is when you finally convince them to make the purchase.
	If you pursue this channel, one thing to keep in mind is to always be looking for parts of your funnel that are slowing down the sales process. Are there any inefficiencies, or things that the potential customers could get caught up on that you can smooth out to make the purchasing decision as easy as possible? The fact that you're calling people directly doesn't mean that you can't spend time optimizing your funnel as well. Affiliate programs are a way for you to reward your existing users and evangelists for spreading the word about your product or service. It can be done one of two ways, you can reward them with money or services within your service, or you can reward them simply by paying them for the referral. Lyft and Uber both utilize the first type of affiliate rewards. They don't pay you cash for your referrals, but they do give you and whoever you refer credit towards a free ride for getting them to sign up. The second type, where you make money off of the referrals, is very common in retail. Amazon, for example, offered the first web retail affiliate program and still offers a major one to this day. Users can sign up for an Amazon Affiliate account, and then earn 4-10% on each sale they drive to Amazon's site. If you have an expensive product, or one with recurring revenue, you could take part of that revenue as an offer to affiliates for getting people to sign up for the site. This could be a one-time reward for helping sell a specific product, or a recurring reward if they earn you a subscription to a service.
	You can also use existing platforms, especially online, to help promote your product. This is what Facebook gamesyes, all those annoying onesare doing, but there are less obtrusive ways to take advantage of it. Spotify, for example, would let you share a Spotify update to Facebook depending on what you're listening to so you could see your friends' music preferences. Evernote took advantage of this by being among the first apps on every single mobile operating system, and every new operating system since its inception. It was one of the first apps on iOS, Android, Windows Phone, Windows 8, and it constantly provides updates to all of these systems. By being one of the first apps on the market, it cemented its role as the note-taking app. If your product or service uses other platforms at all, or could use other platforms, is there a way you can make it stand out there? Or is there a way to own a small niche of an existing platform so that you're top of the mind for people joining that new app store, site, or community? The trade show is a classic example of old-school ways to gain early users, but it's still viable today.
	If you've never heard of one, a trade show is similar to a college career fair, but instead of booths for companies looking to hire there are booths for companies showing off their products to buyers and other companies. Trade shows are not only a good way to impress potential wholesale buyers of your product, but they're an opportunity to impress the media as well. If you can stand out by having a great booth, cool giveaway, or amazing product, the media that's attending will take notice and likely run a story on you. You can then use that story to "trade up" to larger stories, as we discussed in the public relations section. An alternative to the trade show if you don't want to wait for the next one, or don't want to risk being lost in the sea of people, is to host your own event entirely. The most popular example of this right now is to bring people together through "meetups" on the eponymous site meetups.com . You can host your own group on any topic you want, and in doing so create a community of people who represent some of your target market and could be early test users or early customers. You just have to be careful to balance making sure it's a valuable event or meetup for everyone, and not just a long sales pitch for you. Another example is to host a conference related to the field your company works in, where you fly out experts on the subject to give talks about the field and provide advice to people who would also be good customers for you. To make it even more valuable, make sure you record everything and put it online afterwards.
	In between hosting your own events and going to trade shows, you can also look for opportunities to secure speaking engagements related to your field. If you're recognized as an expert in what you do, you might get invited to speak at other people's events or you can pitch yourself as a speaker once you hear about an event being put together. If you don't have a reputation, then you can start by speaking at events for free and then putting recordings of the talk online. Over time, your reputation from small events can move you up to local events, and then to regional events, and then to the large national premiere events where you'll get the most publicity. Don't make the speech entirely about your company, but if you're talking about the field that it works in then mentioning it appropriately is fine. This can be especially useful for enterprise software companies who are looking for a few big sales. Some of your best prospects might be in the room. Last but not least there's community building. Meetups are a type of offline community building, but you can also look at building a web community to attract and keep new users. Many of the best free sites online operate on community building. Wikipedia, for example, staffs very few people and 99% of the work is done by people passionate about sharing their knowledge from their bedrooms or offices. There's a community culture of accuracy, verification, and contributing to the project at large.
	Yelp is another good example. Reviewers who consistently leave good feedback have their reviews featured more prominently, and are event added to an elite internal Yelp community where they get invited to special dinners and events. By creating a community like this you can ensure that you have consistently good content for your users, that the product is being built in the ways that will benefit them most, and you can even use it for hiring people who are the most passionate about your product. Now that you know the 19 traction channels, use Weinberg and Mares' "Bullseye Framework" to help you decide what you should be going after. First, you need to go through all of the traction channels and come up with some reasonable ways that you could use it. It's important to not rule out any traction channel in this step. Even if your first reaction is "oh, that one won't work for me€¦" try your best to come up with a way you could make it work. To guide your thinking around this, list all of the traction channels in a spreadsheet and write down your ideas for how you could use that channel alongside them.
	Also on the spreadsheet, you should make sure to list: On a scale of 1-5, how much potential do you think there is there? What would be the cost to acquire a new customer or user through this channel? How many customers could you reach? And how long would it take you to run a cheap test on that channel?
	Once you have ideas and information down for each traction channel, rank them by placing them in one of three categories, or one of three rings in the bullseye. The outermost circle is the "long-shots," the middle circle is the ones with "potential," and the inner circle is your best options. Now look at your inner circle. If you have more than three things there, move some of them out until later. You want to pick the three that you think have the absolute best chance of moving the needle for your business. Once you have your first three chosen, you can start running tests on those channels to see how effective they are. These tests should be as cheap and as fast as possible--do not spend a huge amount of time or money on the first tests. They should seek to answer questions like: How much can you expect to spend on customers through this channel?
	How many customers do you think you could reach through this channel? Are the customers you're getting through this channel the kind you want right now? If after testing all three none of them seem that viable, go back and test some new ones. But if you do find one that seems promising, then€¦ Once you've demonstrated that a certain channel is viable, then you want to put all of your effort into wringing every last piece of value you can from that channel. Some channels will be better at different stages of the product's lifecycle . Virality, for example, is hard in the beginning when your user base is small. And Sales might be harder when you're enormous. Eventually you'll plateau in a certain channel, and at that point it's time to return to the bullseye and try something new.
	At Zapier, we're focusing on three of the traction channels to measure the value we can get from them, see if they're the best ones to put our time and money behind, and learn if we should be looking at other ones, as well. Since you're reading this, it may be obvious that one of those channels is content marketing. Our blog and are a source of traffic and new users as they're targeted at people who can get the most from Zapierindividuals working in small businesses, marketing departments or startups, and professionals who rely on a variety of web apps or aim to be more productive. Another one is business development, as I mentioned before. We help promote our partner apps that are set up as integrations with Zapier, and in turn many of those partners help promote us since we can make parts of their service easier to use. Finally, we're focusing on email marketing. We encourage readers to sign up for the blog since we regularly create content that they might be interested in, and we let our users know if there are updates or improvements that might interest them. This also helps with promoting our webinars and other events. If you enjoyed learning about the different traction channels and the bullseye framework, then the first thing you should do is go pick up a copy of Traction and get some more in-depth knowledge and examples.
	After that, which traction channels are you focused on? Do you have any awesome examples of ways you leveraged one of the ones we talked about here? Let us know in the comments! Related: " Go All-In-One: 10 CRMs with Awesome Marketing Automation Features " Credits: Customers photo courtesy Ryan McGuire . Trade show photo courtesy InsideView . Speaking engagement courtesy Web Summit . Get productivity tips delivered straight to your inbox We'll email you 1-3 times per weekand never share your information.
	Nathaniel Eliason Nathaniel Eliason is a writer and co-creator of Programming for Marketers. He also drinks silly amounts of tea. Business tips Where to start an online store: The best places for eCommerce Where to start an online store: The best...
	Business tips Intelligent automation: What it is and how to apply it Intelligent automation: What it is and how... Business tips Embracing AI at work: 4 ways to make AI less scary for your team
	Embracing AI at work: 4 ways to make AI less... Business tips AI in customer service: 11 ways to automate support AI in customer service: 11 ways to automate... © 2023 Zapier Inc.
	Why is building the right marketing traction channel something that's often overlooked? They get that growth is important but it usually comes way too late. It'll usually look a little like this: Scenario 1: A founding team believes in their product so much, they adopt a build it and they will come! mentality. In other words, we're not going to put any marketing investment in, all your efforts need to be creating the perfect product - so perfect, in fact, that everyone will be talking about it.  Scenario 2: Some money is set aside for marketing but just because it doesn't deliver results immediately it's deemed a failure and investment is pulled.  Scenario 3: Worse still, they'll mistake what marketing actually is (i.e. a crucial part of growth) and hire a sales person to come in and sell a low value product. Thus, losing money.
	If you've experienced these...run, my pretties; run for the hills. Or at least, get to the root of the problem. Why is growth told to take a backseat in the pursuit of getting the product just right? Especially in a startup when you're not 100% who your customer is and how they derive value from you, you need to invest in both the product and building marketing momentum. I'm not suggesting anything groundbreaking here. Many entrepreneurs who build great products simply don't have a good distribution strategy' - Marc Andreesen
	Then you've got Weinberg and Mares in Traction who state that product development and traction strategy must work in tandem. Just like customer development needs to work with product development right at the start. What's the implication of building traction and getting your distribution channels till after you've sorted your product? You build your product... and you realise there's no market for it. You build your product€¦ and you realise you're building it for a customer segment that won't pay. You build your product€¦ and you realise it is going to take 3-4 months to get any sort of data to feed into a wider marketing and sales plan. But you've only got 3 months' cash in the bank.
	In other words, you've left it too late. The thing is, it takes time to test marketing traction. It can take a while to build growth, to get really good at that one growth channel and rinse it for as long as you can until a competitor becomes savvy and nicks your idea / approach. And, depending on which growth approach you pursue, it could take months to get real tangible data. Growth marketing won't generate results immediately. It takes time. It takes weeks to test paid marketing, it takes months to test virality, it can take even longer to test SEO. Which means you're going to have to get really good at spinning multiple plates. Now I've had my usual moan, let's look at a few ways to decide which growth channels could be right for your startup.
	To be successful, you must match the way you market your products with the way your prospects learn about and shop for your products. Brian Halligan, HubSpot. Ways to think about growth and traction Back to Weinberg & Mares who suggest that there are 19 channels available to startups which you can use to drive growth. They also provide a useful framework that helps you to select which three you should focus on. Examples of these traction channels include: SEO, email marketing, sales, trade shows, social and display adverts, speaking engagements etc.
	Drive Growth by Picking the Right Lane - by Hockenmaier and Rachitsky - talks about the three lanes that make up the majority of new customer acquisition. Whilst they are talking about consumer products, the thinking I feel can be applied if you're in b2b also. These lanes are: Performance marketing - Facebook, Google Ads, LinkedIn (think Booking.com) Content marketing - YouTube, SEO (think Instagram) Virality marketing - Referrals, WOM (think Air BnB, dropbox) Personally, out of the two approaches I've just included, I prefer the latter framework to work towards.  It allows you to test a few tactics under one wider umbrella, all united by one sentiment.
	There are a few questions to ask yourself to determine which approach and which tactics are a starting point for your startup's growth strategy. These are: Q. How do your customers search and buy? Q. What naturally feels right to you & your team's capabilities? Q. How much time do you have? Q. What are your competitors doing? The idea is being that once you've sat down and discussed the answers, you may find yourself swaying towards a particular route. Don't forget, you're biased!
	This is something to consider, especially if you've held a marketing role before. Just because one channel worked in a previous business does not mean it'll work in your new business. I touched on this very topic in my talk, 3 things every marketer needs to know before joining a startup to preserve their sanity. Focusing on the right marketing traction channel: A startup example I am going to talk you through some of the ways we approached setting up the growth channel for our B2C offering. Remember those questions I put to you? Here's how we used them to guide our growth strategy.
	Business: Careercake Growth channel: Content Marketing Tools: Video + SEO. Why it made sense for Careercake to pursue content marketing as its primary growth lane: Careercake started out as a YouTube channel. It reached 6 million hits and 35k subscribers, which led to the repositioning as an online platform in 2016. [FYI: I was not involved in Careercake when it started. Kudos to Aimee, the Founder, who realised that YouTube was a place to build a community. In 2016, I joined the startup's founding team whereby I was brought in to help commercialise it]. So, you could say, I had a pretty good foundation to build upon.
	Before I go any further, I am not claiming big bold results. Early on, it doesn't quite work that way. Plus, I can't stand people that boast: WE INCREASED SALES BY 1,000,000,000 PERCENT! WE INCREASED ALL THE MRR BY 16000000000%! Stuff like that isn't helpful when it's out of context, and when you don't use the actual figures. What we did learn was 1) how to work out what topics work best in terms of converting paying customers 2) how to identify the most profitable subscribers, and 3) how to increase the inbound link profile of Careercake. This all ultimately helped us to build confidence around our brand which had a great impact on the b2b growth strategy. .
	How do our customers search and buy? We provide content to those early on in their careers, those dubbed the YouTube generation'. If they ask a question and it's taking too long to get an answer, they'll jump on Google or YouTube to search for an answer. They're also really comfortable with creating content themselves. A look into search trends, using tools like Google Keyword Planner, reveals the nature of questions people type in to help them in their career. What do I do in the first days of a new job? How do I tell my boss they're micro-managing me? It's almost like the search engine is their confidant.
	 What naturally felt right to our team's capabilities? The team's background naturally fell towards content, with SEO, writing, audience research and presenting. Our content and tactics comprised: YouTube episodes, blogging, newsletter and automation to nurture those sign ups to reduce churn. The idea being, we'd connect search queries with further titles. We'd look at search themes and extend our titles, and we'd use the requests that came into us directly for further video content ideas. Careercake's YouTube channel How much time did we have?
	I won't sugar-coat it, the content growth lane can be timely, whilst you wait for indexing, inbound links, and also having to deal with changes in algorithms, the impact of a rebrand and redirect plan€¦ oh, and competing against BIG market leaders for particular products. We were fortunate enough to have raised investment so we were able to focus on one lane and give it time to bed in. What were our competitors doing? Interestingly, not many of our competitors had a b2c offering. If anything, we were advised by several people to drop the b2c offering. (We didn't, obviously, and that's totally another post). That meant we couldn't really copy' / stalk / delete as appropriate. What we could see they were investing in, however, was events and paid advertising. To be fair however their businesses were far more mature than ours, therefore they were already using a few channels.
	It was here however that we learned that you can have competitors and you can have competitors. E.g. whilst may have considered training company 101' our main competitor, in fact, there may have been another organisation that was clearly making progress in terms of SEO. They were a different type of competitor. What happened next? We are not at the scale part of growing a startup, we're still relatively early-stage, however, what we went onto learn was this: 60% of our signups came from organic activity, of which 80% went on to become paying customers. Some of our channels led to increased sign ups, however, they brought in the type of traffic not necessarily worth optimising for at that point.
	It took us around 4 months to start seeing profitable returns on our work. Good thing we were also plugging away at developing out the product too. If we'd only focused on the product development and not how to reach potential customers, we'd be really, really behind. Every 14 days (ish), the latest article straight to that inbox of yours. Sign up for ideas on identifying and landing your first profitable customers. I respect your privacy. Pinky promise.
	Tak! Thanks! Now, go check your inbox. Services Go-To-Market for Pre-Launch Startups Marketing for Product-Led Startups Startups Go-to-market strategy guide What traction looks like!? Should you join a startup?! Early-stage startup marketing
	SaaS Marketing Get SaaS onboarding right Creating strategic content Your SaaS signup workflow Awesome SaaS email campaigns © Copyright 2023. Oh Blimey LTD. (Get ya mitts off, *shakes fist*)
	We are hiring! Addressing business customers, enterprises or corporations Addressing individuals, freelancers, influencers Growing both supply and demand in parallel Pure SaaS, zero-touch, concierge on-boarding SaaS
	Services & products for enterprises and corporations The supply side of any markeplace in most of the times refers to enterprises By special case / challenge By stage Pure e-commerce with one-time products or subscriptions services
	Where Doctors, architects, consultants, life coaches offer their services Digital Products offered to individuals such as webinars, ebooks, academies etc Covering the demand side, that in most of the cases is addressing individuals By special case / challenge By stage
	Offering options for individual to book a venue, walkthroughs or events Offering the ability to brands to promote their products to individuals Review sites, listing sites allowing users to find and review them Directories of physical venues or properties for users to book, rent or buy By special case / challenge
	By stage We offer various audits to help you identify areas for improvement and optimize your marketing strategies. Ideal when transitioning to a new agency, increasing the investment in tools or ad spend, adding a new product or service, or other business cases. We are hiring! We are hiring! Everyone related to the business world craves for a way to grow in rapid ways. However, most of these business ventures fail. The reason? More often than not, it's due to the lack of traction channels.
	But why? What usually happens is that entrepreneurs get carried away by random things they see or hear about. When I first read Traction, one of the top growth hacking books by Gabriel Weinberg & Justin Mares , the authors made clear that things that might not work for you in your first steps may work later  and vice versa. Traction Book covers the main 19 growth marketing channels that can drive traffic: This very Infographic is a visual representation of these 19 channels we made for you: What if a user brings on board the next one? Well, this is what Viral Marketing is about: finding a way to bring conversions by luring your existing users to share your awesomeness with their family, friends, and colleagues  in most occasions by rewarding them to do so.
	As proud ex-founders of a Viral-Marketing software that has just been acquired from WishPond here is an analysis on Viral-Marketing by our gurus Traditional media invaded the Internet, following the hype of the last decade. Being included in big publications still works  bringing great results. People enjoy the freedom that Reddit and Product Hunt offer but still, they're bound on the trend-setting media publications. Just make sure you always make it to the news! Do stunts and treat your customers outrageously well, and word will spread. This is not something for the weak-hearted  a lot of people may hate you but in the meantime, you can create enough buzz for your thing to taker off. Ryan Holiday can assure you of that. You can reach hundreds of millions of people by advertising on search engines. Everyone's familiar with Google AdWords nowadays, and a lot of people claim they know how to do it. Beware, as you can spend a lot of money on low-quality customers. Do your homework! Let's face it. We, the people, love social media. We also love communities and websites closely related to our taste. Our inhabitation on such platforms revolutionized advertising in general, creating new fields for marketers and companies to earn big time. You have just to find where your clients hang out.
	More on here Before going nuts on how old-fashioned TV or billboards is, you should calculate the time you spend surfing on your mobile while being on your couch with the TV playing or in the Underground surrounded by big @ass billboards. Chances are you've searched for something you heard or saw while in the aforementioned situations. SEO is the process of getting traffic from free, organic, editorial or natural search results on search engines. In other words, it's the method to make it on the top of search engines for the keywords you are trying to rank. It's not a sprint; it's a marathon! You can approach your SEO needs with the two options. Getting an SEO Package that fits your plan or starting from an SEO Strategy Content marketing is a marketing approach focused on creating and distributing helpful, applicable, and consistent content to attract and retain your target users and, ultimately, to drive conversions for your product, service, or business in general. Articles, guides, infographics, and webinars have something in common; they generate a revenue stream!
	Learn more about content marketing and particularly the very relevant SEO Copywriting topic Doing Email Marketing is to use a series of automated, personalized emails for the sake of increasing sales. Many players out there do fantastic things, crafting irresistible-to-click subject lines, as part of their main sales strategy aiming to boost conversions. Email is a super channel to be used for outbound marketing or in general what we call outreaching. Learn more here Allocating your engineering resources on building free tools that make your prospects' life easier is a proven and a rather successful method of acquiring customers. Hubspot, for instance, based its whole early traction on tools like Website and Twitter Grader and continues until today with the Free CRM. A lot of people get frustrated when mining for their first users. The truth is that you can get the first wave of them just by targeting blogs they already read. Contacting those blogs for guest posts, coverage or just to place your company's badge might get you where you ought to be. You scratch my back and I'll scratch yours is a phrase that recaps in the most accurate way. By building partnerships you can reach hundreds, thousands, or millions of customers, in ways that benefit both parties. You can go for a Standard Partnership, Joint Venture, or Licensing. And Oh, Google used it as an initial traction channel.
	Generate leads, evaluate them and convert them into paying customers . That's sales, and sales are pretty useful when your product is expensive and requires interpersonal interaction before purchase To scale things up you need a sales model that will not only apply to your prospects' problems but also enhance your product development. How about getting others to sell your products by letting them keep a percentage of the earnings for doing so? Affiliate programs are used by tons of companies for over 15 years becoming one of the Internet's traditions. More or less it's like Business Development, but on this occasion, the partnership is between a company and an individual. Social media changed the way we perceive reality, digital advertising, and marketing. It's only natural for companies to use them as the core of their functionality. Building an audience from scratch can be a pain in the @ss. Facebook has 1.25bn people ready to love you. That's exactly what the guys on Zynga said to themselves. Trade Shows offer the chance for your company to show off its products in person to business insiders and get you close to prospects that could be ridiculously interested in what you do. It's a great opportunity to make major announcements, seal partnerships or just build interest around what you do. Sponsoring or running offline events could get you a lot of traction. It's an opportunity for you to engage with potential customers about their problems. You see, unlike online advertising which might not work well with some people, giving them a chance to meet you can be way more effective.
	Educational articles, guides, and webinars provide great value and might bring you back customers. But the thing that people enjoy the most is attending educational events. Getting to know your prospects in person and proving your value, gets you one step closer to converting them into paying customers. Building a community is all about investing in connections among your users, fostering those relationships, and helping them bring more people into your company's circle Your goal should be to create an army of evangelists  passionate users that tell other people about how awesome your product is. Early startup traction can mean the difference between success or failure  especially if you are a startup. Having early traction is a sign that you have a product that people want to use. Also, early startup traction acts as insurance for VCs and their investment. Theodore has a 20-year experience in running successful and profitable software products. During his free time, he coaches and consults startups. His career includes managerial posts for companies both in Greece and abroad and he has significant skills on intrapreneurship and entrepreneurship.
	If you found this article valuable, you can share it with your fellow marketers Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked * Comment * Name * Email *
	 Privacy Policy | Cookie Policy | © 2023 Growthrocks All rights reserved Share this article
	My role at Growth Division is to drive our growth as an agency. That means I'm always networking and talking with startup founders. These conversations are always fun, always inspiring, and always end up coming back to the same topic€¦. how to grow. As a founder, or as part of a founding team, there is always this underlying desire to grow. And crucially, a desire to learn how to grow and how to build a growth marketing strategy . It's one of the fundamental challenges and it's never far from the minds of the founding team. At Growth Division we see strategy not as a one-time document you do at the beginning of your startup journey, but an ever-evolving process of experimentation made up of specific hypotheses you're trying to validate (or invalidate). One of the most important aspects to this is the specific traction channels you're going to use, and how they're going to interact with each other. Enter: The Bullseye Marketing Framework€¦ The Bullseye Framework is a tool that allows you to hone in on the marketing channels that will yield success for your business in the long-term. In my opinion, it is the ultimate way to think about your growth marketing strategy as a startup founder. It was developed by the clever pair Gabriel Weinberg and Justin Mares. The outer ring of the Bullseye represents all the possible growth or traction channels you can choose from to grow your business. In the original framework, there are 19 traction channels. At Growth Division we added a 20th channel (customer engagement) as we believed the theory could benefit from one small addition. Here's a peek at our version of the Bullseye Marketing Framework:
	The middle ring represents the process of whittling down the options to between 4 and 6 channels. These are the traction channels you believe have potential to move the needle for your company's growth over the coming 6 months. Finally, the centre circle is bullseye! In case you hadn't guessed it, this is where you want to be . Once you've validated a channel as a scalable route to market it should become part of your long-term channel mix in the centre circle. One thing we always bang on about at Growth Division is the importance of being customer-oriented. We've written more about this in our go-to-market-strategy article but before you start trying to create your middle ring of potential channels you need to understand your target audience. That means€¦ talk to them! Conduct interviews, run surveys, talk to your friends who fit your persona. You should gather data points (both qualitative and quantitative) and build a picture of your Ideal Customer Persona. This should include info about their demographics, geographics, pain points, goals and potential blockers. You should also think about where they hang out, where they gather information, where they do research before making a buying decision. All that learning will give you the tools you need to properly evaluate your traction channels€¦. As this post is about explaining the Bullseye Marketing Framework I thought it would be useful to dive into each of the channels in turn. I'll give a high-level overview of what the channel is and some standout examples of companies smashing each channel.
	Remember, the point of the Bullseye Framework is not to tackle all 20 traction channels at once. It allows you to assess the marketing options available, make strategic choices, then validate using our recommend approach of hypotheses and growth experiments. SEM is paid advertising on search engines, whether it's Google Ads, Bing Ads or other search engines. When people search for specific problems they are facing they have very high intent to purchase a solution. The channel works well if there are high search volumes for specific keywords and low competition on those works. It's a highly measurable, predictable channel with a large focus on data-based decisions. That said, there's also room for creativity when it comes to your advert copywriting. Just like: Hubble Office Space  these guys own the paid searches for their brand. Social Ads are paid adverts on social media platforms. Display Ads are paid adverts on sites across the Google Display Network (GDN). Targeting on these platforms can be carefully refined to get in front of highly defined audiences, these can be extremely effective at top of the funnel awareness and conversions. GDN is most effective as an awareness play, or to re-market to people who have visited your site. Often social and display ads are paired with a lower-funnel SEM approach to build a full-funnel growth engine. Just like: basically any competent ecommerce store will have highly targeted ads and re-targeting ads on GDN. Recently I got enticed into buying some Saye shoes due to some excellent social ads.
	Offline ads can range from advertising on public transport networks, to big billboard ads, to ads in magazines, to flyers, to handwritten letters. It can be a highly effective way to advertise if you have a big brand and want to raise awareness in a specific location or to specific demographics. Another use case might be physical businesses (like coffee shops) that want to advertise in a local area. Just like: McDonald's  when you're in a 200-metre range of a McDonalds you'll start to see ads for Big Macs on telephone boxes and signs. Then 200 metres later you notice McDonald's and really feel like a Big Mac! SEO, as the name suggests, is optimising your website to rank more highly on search engines and appear more frequently in searches containing specific words. As you can imagine, this can be quite a technical channel that needs a structured approach led by someone who knows what they're talking about. The structure of the site, on-site content, number of backlinks, site speed, time on site and social signals are all variables in how search engines will rank your site. If you start ticking these boxes you'll start to drive cheap, reliable, relevant organic traffic to your site. Growth Division had great success working with Clade on their site's SEO. SEO is a channel that can take a bit of time to get going, but can pay off massively in the medium to long term. Just like: MVF Global build high-traffic, optimised sites that rank highly on search engines to capture leads and send to partners who pay for leads. They built a large part of their business by ranking highly on search engines! This involves getting mentioned on sites that have high volumes of relevant traffic on them, specifically by getting guest posts on them. This serves three important functions: firstly, it helps drive relevant traffic to your site secondly, it helps build the author's (and subsequently the company's) reputation as a thought-leader and finally, it drives up your domain authority through the backlink. It's related to, and sometimes overlaps with, digital PR.
	Just like: Kurve is one of our partners at Growth Division and the founder, Oren , has done a fantastic job at getting featured on well-known sites with high domain authority such as HubSpot, BuiltWith and Zapier. This has been a successful channel in helping the agency grow. Content marketing can refer to any number of forms of content from blogs, to videos to infographics. Content is a fantastic channel that can sit across the entire marketing funnel, helping drive awareness, educate prospects and improve conversions. It can also assist with your SEO and community building activities. Just like: HubSpot is a great example of a business smashing its content marketing strategy. When searching for many startup or growth-orientated keywords you'll find HubSpot on the first page. This channel is more of a B2B focused channel in the context of startups, it's about getting members of the team to appear in events or shows as guest speakers. It can be huge for brand awareness and positioning your founding teams as thought leaders in your sector. Just like: Daniel Priestley, in his book Key Person of Influence', advocates building the reputation of the founder as an industry leader by speaking. Priestley has been doing this himself to grow his various businesses.
	In the original Bullseye Marketing Framework, this was offline events but we've updated it in the context of a more digitally-focused world. This channel refers to creating your own branded events as a touchpoint in the sales/marketing process. Events can either be used as a top-of-funnel hook or a conversion tactic further down the funnel. Just like: Salesforce Dreamforce is a superb example of this, albeit on a large scale. It's an event that attracts 1000's of Salesforce users and prospects from across the globe and is a crucial channel for the company to maintain it's perception as a thought leader and as the industry-standard CRM. In B2B marketing trade shows can be a fantastic way to get in front of a highly relevant audience of potential buyers. You can benefit from brand exposure and if you have the right team at the show you can start some interesting conversations and hopefully generate plenty of leads. Just like: Just Eat are at all the food-tech events and often will go all-out to sponsor the event or buy up large stands covered with their branding. Building a community around the problem your business is solving can be a very effective way of being the top-of-mind solution when people think about the problem when they experience it. A community can solidify your reputation as a go-to, trustworthy solution. Building a community can also be an effective way to validate a market before launching, then selling into the community when you launch, using the members as early adopters. We wrap organic social management into community building' at Growth Division  because a properly maintained organic social presence should feel like a community. Posting good quality content to your community across social channels can support paid ads or direct outreach very effectively.
	Just like: LemList have a Facebook Group for people who use email outreach marketing as a channel to market where people share hacks and ideas to their fellow members, especially ones that revolve around the LemList tool. Using affiliate partners can be a hugely scalable and effective way to grow sales as you're enlisting other marketers to leverage their audience and/or growth skills to make more sales. In return, you give a commission on each sale the affiliate partner makes. For certain B2C companies it can be an incredibly effective way to scale quickly. Just like: Pipedrive, and in fact many SaaS companies, have successfully leveraged affiliate partners to drive sign-ups. By partnering with CRM consultants, marketing agencies and other partners they have driven sign-ups. This is a bit of an out-there channel for growth, the premise is to take advantage of other platforms' traffic by redirecting it to your site. This could either be by leveraging audiences in Facebook or Slack groups or diverting traffic from other sites and platforms. It can be a bit underhand if not thought through carefully, so be careful when planning this growth marketing channel out. Just like: A super famous example of this is Airbnb posting their listings on Craigslist. In their early days of growth, this tactic drove large volumes of traffic to their site and was imperative to their early growth.
	This is a favourite channel for growth marketers, it's building a tool to use as some form of product for prospects. You might see an opportunity to offer people a useful tool that enables you to capture their email address so you can market to them. This could come in the form of calculators, templated spreadsheets or makeshift tools (using tools like Outgrow). It can worth for B2B, for example by building free tools to capture leads, or B2C by building quizzes or giving away free' versions of the product. Just like: My favourite example of this is HubSpot's email signature creation tool. HubSpot wants to target businesses just setting up their CRM, and every new business owner wants a fancy new email signature. Low and behold, Hubspot's tool ranks highly on Google searches for this. Viral marketing, in the context of B2C, or referral marketing, in the context of B2B, can be a highly effective marketing channel to grow your business. By leveraging your existing customer base and their networks you can drive large amounts of relevant traffic. It's one of the channels that, if done right, can lead to exponential growth. Just like: When Monzo was launching they had a leaderboard system where you could jump the queue if you referred other people, this system enabled them to grow quickly and build up hype around their product. This is a purely B2B marketing channel. Building a sales process and sales team to sell your product can be very effective, especially when it is fueled by a well-oiled lead generation engine. It is sales job to get on the phone and speak directly to customers.
	Just like: Epos Now had a sales team that was responsible for a lot of the growth in the company successfully growing across the UK and beyond. Cold calling, demo'ing, boots-on-the-ground sales reps were key drivers in their growth. In the terminology used in the Bullseye Framework, Business Development is building partnerships with other businesses who are fishing in the same (customer) pond as you. Partnerships have the potential to be very scalable and cost-effective routes to market, as you have other people recommending your business. However, it isn't as easy as it sounds to build a successful partnership, it takes time, effort and aligned incentives to make this channel work effectively. Just like: Zapier is a great example of a company using technology integration partnerships as a way to attract new customers and serve the customer more effectively. As you might guess from the name, this is about doing something a bit out there to get media coverage or attention. It's not necessarily the most repeatable strategy but it is one that can get you huge amounts of attention. Just like: Richard Branson driving a tank in Times Square, New York. Need I explain more?
	This refers to more conventional PR, where your company tries to get media coverage at specific, targeted outlets. This could be both paid-for coverage or organic coverage. If you're targeted in your PR outreach and manage to get exposure on a platform that your target audience reads this can have a massive impact. Just like: The ALS Ice Bucket Challenge is a top example of using PR as a way to grow awareness of your brand/product. The videos of people pouring ice water over their heads went so viral media outlets reported on it. This is a B2B growth channel. It's a highly effective one if you have a really targeted Customer Persona, as you can gather highly relevant data to reach out to. It's one we have a huge amount of success with at Growth Division for B2B startups, especially when combined with social and display ads on LinkedIn and community building. Just like: Growth Division successfully help startups run this channel, for example, Bippit is getting qualified meetings booked in their sales team's diaries each week. We added this 20th channel to the Bullseye Framework mix. This channel is focused further down the funnel. It's about engaging existing customers to spend more, or remain as a customer for longer and ultimately improving the customer's lifetime value (LTV) . You can use email and notification mechanics to continually re-engage and upsell customers. We see improving LTV as a core part of the growth marketer skillset, as well as reducing customer acquisition costs.
	Just like: Deliveroo is a good example of a company with a solid customer engagement strategy, encouraging users to repeatedly use the app through notifications, emails, offers and prompts. Once you've got your middle ring, you want to get testing. But how do you know what's working and what's not? A core part of measuring effectiveness of traction channels is to track customer acquisition cost  both as a whole, and for individual channels. It will tell you how efficient any particular effort is at generating new customers for the business. BUT. And it's a big but. It's so, so important you don't get trapped into pitting channels against each other. The ideal traction channel mix should complement each other. Some channels will naturally show a good CAC  for example, SEM or direct outreach. But your data on that may not show the impact your blogs, community building or PR is having on the conversion rates from SEM and direct outreach. So it's important to treat each channel on its own merits, and test them thoroughly, before you make decisions about what's working and what's not working.
	In short, the Bullseye Framework is a great tool to build out your initial growth marketing strategy. Importantly, it also conceptualises the process of continuous testing and proving your strategy over time as you move from the outer circle into the middle of the bullseye. Your marketing strategy should not be a one-time process, but something that you're continuously trying to validate. Likewise, the Bullseye process isn't something to do once, but over time. Your channel mix will need to change and be reviewed at different stages of your company's growth. We recommend re-doing the Bullseye every 6 months to keep your strategy fresh and up-to-date. Growth Division's founding partner Tristan wrote this article and is an expert in Go-To-Market planning for startups. He leads the Bullseye sessions with prospective founders. He will help you set objectives, plan your budget and then build a suitable channel mix. What Is A Go-To-Market Strategy? When introducing a brand new product or business to the market (or a new... When starting a business, so much of your chance of success revolves around your ability to collect, interpret and...
	What Is Customer Acquisition Cost? Customer acquisition cost (CAC) is clearly one of the most important metrics in marketing.... Talk to a growth advisor Copyright © Growth Division 2023 Website Design & SEO by Logic Design
	Building an excellent product is one thing. Gaining traction is quite another. And in Gabriel Weinberg's famous 2015 bestseller, Traction , he covers 19 of the most popular routes for doing precisely that. The first thing to state upfrontyou don't want to be active on all 19 channels, equally, at the same time. That's not the point of this post. The point is to have a list of options, and to help you match and fit those which best suit your: If your product is highly technical, with a premium price tag, and requires a long, involved on-boarding process... chances are, a quick flashy instagram ad won't be enough to win a new customer. Making use of traction channels, therefore, is also about learning to prioritize these channels, according to your situation.
	Hint : Your situation isn't static, either. You'll want to be able to update the investment you place into each channel, dynamically. And that's what our Traction Channels Prioritizer table is designed to help with. First thing's first, though. Let's just get this out of the way, then. Here's the bullet list: Alongside the channels themselves, Weinberg also points out a methodology for honing in on and prioritizing traction channels once you are up and running.
	Your customers doing the marketing for you. A neat idea, no? Viral marketing deliberately deploys tactics that make it easier for the word of your product to spread and replicate : hence, virus. Whether you want to go deep into the psychology of mimetics, or Dawkin's theory of the meme' and socio-cultural evolutionall you need to know is that some things are more likely to go viral than others. You'll find a few recommended tactics in the table, including: The media has already changed a lot since Weinberg's 2015 book. Today, the media' includes any variety of podcasts, bloggers, YouTubers and Substack writersalongside the more traditional and institutional outlets. That only to say that the opportunities for Public Relations' (PR) are bountiful in 2022. Some examples: Quite what it sounds like, unconventional approaches to PR often follow the logic of no such thing as bad press'. Of course, that isn't true, but taking an unconventional approach to PR means you don't mind turning some heads; without spending too much on high production value.
	This one I'll leave the creativity to you on. But you might gain some inspiration from the Dollar Shave Club's' sensational YouTube video campaign that certainly got the word out... You can do search the patient way or the expensive way. The hard and patient way is SEO (we'll cover more on that below). The expensive way is via Search Engine Marketing (SEM). You know those results at the top of your Google search which read Ad' under them? That's SEM. Some keywords are highly competitiveso much so that it may not really be an option for you to show up organically'. But if the keyword is highly relevant for your target audience, and you feel that people searching those terms will be interested in your productthen SEM is a direct ticket to the top of the search results. You know what these are. Instagram, Facebook, Google Ad Network, LinkedIn, TikTok. While they have multiple revenue streams (LinkedIn, particularly), well, you already know it: they mostly run on ads . As a user of the consumer product (social media), you're typically on the receiving end of them. But as a business owner you may also choose to place yourself on the buying endand fortunately, as some of the most powerful tech companies in the world, using these ad platforms is incredibly simple, intuitive and far-reaching.
	Ever seen a billboard that made you stop and think? Gave you a chuckle? Made you curious to learn more? Well, that could be yours. In fact, these days billboards, pamphlets and other forms of offline marketing are relatively cheapsince they've been largely overshadowed by their digital counterparts. If you're looking to advertise to a local, physical regionoffline advertising might just be a winning ticket to gain some early traction and awareness. Chances are you ended up on this page thanks to SEO. Maybe you searched something like 19 Traction Channels' and this page showed up near the top? If so, you've just been on the receiving end of SEO's superpowers... because I might have written this article 2 years ago, and it still might sit at the top of results, bringing you to my site where we can have this lovely, one-way conversation ðŸ™‚ The famous chicken-and-egg problem of how do I get awesome testimonials if I have no customers if my prospective customers want to see testimonials before purchase, but to get those testimonials...'
	Content marketing, in many ways, resolves this problem. For me, the best way to think about content marketing is in terms of giving value upfront . Your product might be a revolutionary AI SaaS platform that will change the way your customers order their cappucinos... but before they even give you a try, they'll want to feel like they've gotten to know you a little better. Content marketing lets you do that in a helpful way. Some of the other traction methods will introduce you' to your prospects, sure enough. But it's promotional. It's an ad . And, odds are, it's annoying. Content marketing lets you introduce yourself in a helpful way, sharing something of what you're all about, giving some related tips and doing so in a non-intrusive way. After several such lovely interactions, don't you think your readers might be a little more interested to hear what products you have to offer? Email is still one of the most cost-effective channels for building relationships with customers and prospects. It deserves its own post (and there are already thousands of excellent breakdowns), but the tall and short of it is: email is one of the few traction channels that I recommend every business plan for by default. You can always opt out if it really isn't relevant... but chances are, it is. Ever found yourself inputting an email address to find out how much an apartment or house in your area costs? Ever signed up to a mailing list to get the results' of a quiz or a useful revenue calculator?
	Engineering as marketing refers to using tech and tools as a means of giving visitors something valuable upfronttypically in exchange for an email or a way of reaching you later on. Partnerships are another excellent way to gain traction early on. In the fast-moving world of modern SaaS, integrations are one of the most popular ways of partnering with other players. But when it comes to spreading the word, you can also arrange co-marketing campaigns. Agreements to promote one another's channels as you release a product, service, or maybe even an event together. Where a lot of the channels mentioned so far might fall under the category of inbound' marketing and advertising, sales covers a large swath of activities that are best described as outbound'. Cold emailing, follow-ups, networking events and knocking on doorssales is about starting and building relationships with potential customers. If you have a highly valuable (and costly) product, or if your customer/client relationships typically last a long time, then developing a strong sales channel and sales practices can be a very good idea.
	A more formal version of the positive feedback loop that comes from viral marketing is an affiliate program. Here, members of your program are incentivised to spread the word of your product directly. The rewards for your affiliate program can vary based on your offeringfor example, if you run a clothing line, you might offer stock from your catalog, or vouchers for purchasebut typically this can be a fixed percentage (commission) on every referred sale. Some popular software exist for setting up affiliate programs, rapidlyor you can also check out this Influencer Hub' which doubles as an Affiliate Program tracker inside Notion, here. This sounds rather generic, and it kind of is. But it covers everything from Instagram and LinkedIn to YouTube, Reddit, Pinterest, eBay and ProductHunt. If there already exist large platforms that service your target audience, and you have a profile thereleveraging that opportunity for discovery can be very valuable. The past years have changed a lot about how we perceive events. For one thing, the rise in virtual events seems to be something that isn't going away any time soon. Events can be an excellent way to provide a more intimate experience for prospective customers, while still giving them every outi.e. in a low pressure environment.
	Check out community-based events platforms like Circle and Tevent if you'd like to get started with virtual events. If you do go ahead and start running events, one thing you'll quickly run into is a demand for speakers. What exactly is it that your attendees will be attending for, again? Running your own events isn't the only way to leverage events though. Picking up speaking gigs at conferences, events and workshops can be another way to put yourself in front of a highly relevant audience and ensure that you have their full attention. One of the fastest growing job categories is Online Community Manager'. When you lump in similar roles like Social Media Manager' and Community Moderator', it becomes clear that fostering and cultivating your online cohorts is critical. Building your community can be anything from asking their opinion on an upcoming feature to inviting them to a live event. If you don't yet have a community, it can also mean joining existing communities, contributing what you can and seeing if there's demand for a discussion around the thing you're trying to build and deliver.
	Since the strength of online writing has grown so much, the category of targeting blogs' almost blends into what was once traditional PR. But there are some nuances. For example, the benefits of guest posts and appearances on blogs in your niche isn't just the immediate boost of traffic from your partner's readershipit's also in the lovely SEO link juice that's likely to come from any direct mention. For those interested in investing in the content marketing and SEO game, targeting blogs in your niche can be a very important channel to cultivate. The common scene for a 2015 startup might have still be to spend $2,500 on a booth at a trade show (I don't know what it really costs ðŸ¤·), but in 2022 that may not be your only bet. Platforms like Hopin are becoming increasingly popularand their virtual booth at conferences is perhaps the new version of a trade show traction channel. Either waytrade shows can be a way to begin a conversation with high-stakes relationships and partners... probably not necessary if your goal is to sell mass volume of B2C type subscriptions or products.
	How you acquire customers for your business will undoubtedly change over time. Understanding which channels are available to you is an important first step. A useful second step is to be able to prioritize and sort them rapidly. You can use the Traction Channels component to help you do this, and update it whenever you and the team want to revisit where you're investing your time on gaining traction. €
	The Traction Bullseye Framework by Gabriel Weinberg and Justin Mares in their book, Traction, is a simple, but effective process on how a startup team can focus in on the right channels for distribution resulting in a surge of customer acquisition. Here is a summary of key elements from their book. Most businesses actually get zero distribution channels to work. Poor distribution not product is the number one cause of failure. If you can get even a single distribution channel to work, you have a great business. If you try for several but don't nail one, you're finished. So it's worth the time to do the needed research to find the single best distribution channels for a startup. Using the Bullseye Framework to find your channel is a five-step process: Traction Thinking The number one reason that investors pass on entrepreneurs they otherwise might back is their focus on the product to the exclusion of everything else. Many entrepreneurs who build great products simply don't have a good distribution strategy. Even worse is when they insist that they don't need one, or call [their] no distribution strategy a viral marketing strategy.'
	Traction Thinking involves understanding these strategies that can be employed across each of the nineteen traction channels. Traction Testing Continuous testing is the key to getting traction with Bullseye because all marketing channels become saturated.  To combat this reality you should consistently conduct small experiments.  Consistently running cheap tests will also allow you to discover new techniques with amazing results. When trying to figure out what traction channel to focus on using Bullseye, you run cheap tests on the traction channels in your inner circle. First tests in a channel are often very cheap: for instance, if you spend just $250 on AdWords, you'll get a rough idea of how well the search engine marketing channel works for your business.  Really focusing on a channel takes significant time and resources. Be sure to have your tracking system in place with a spreadsheet or another form of analytics, so you can be sure of your test results and comparisons.
	An optimization can take place by using A/B testing , that in its most basic form is a science experiment with a control group (A ) and an experimental group (B). A/ B testing is often called split testing because for the best results you split people (randomly) into one of the two groups, and then measure what they do. Making A/ B testing a habit (even if you just run 1 test a week) will improve your efficiency in a traction channel by 2 3x.  These are just a few of the tools that test optimization without complex changes to your code; Optimizely, Visual Website Optimizer, and Unbounce. Online analytics tools like Clicky, Google Analytics or Mixpanel tell you who is coming to your site, at what frequency, and, perhaps most importantly, when and where they are leaving your site. Bullseye Spreadsheet will give you the spreadsheet that the authors created. Their columns include: Traction Channel/strategy/status 1-5/Test/How Promoting(1-5)/CAC(Cost to Acquire Customers)/Customer Availability/Timeframe/Good Customers (1-5)/Impressions/Response Rate/Conversion Rate/LTV Defining your Critical Path is reaching your traction goal with the fewest number of steps . After laying the Bullseye Framework, the Traction book focuses on the defining and giving clear examples of 19 different traction channels  that can be considered, tested and effectively used by startups.
	Traction lays out a logical progression that any startup can follow to start testing and experimenting with new traction channels and hopefully find new sources of customers. It's so useful that at Zapier we're using the Traction framework (which this post will outline soon) to guide our thinking around growth in 2015, reports Nathaniel Eliason.
	Most of the questions I get from startups about growth stem from a basic misunderstanding of where they are along the journey of growth, and what that means for their growth priorities and efforts.  I've talked a little bit about this in two posts - Traction vs Growth and 5 Steps To Choose Your Customer Acquisition Channel . More needs to be written about the topic, so I was excited to get an early peek at the book Traction: A Startup Guide to Getting Customers co-authored by Justin Mares and Gabriel Weinberg . For those of you who read my material you'll probably notice I'm a fan of a few things when it comes to writing about growth.  Comprehensiveness, quality, and frameworks. The book contains all three of those elements, part of which you get a sneak peek here in Justin's guest post about their Bullseye Framework. Enjoy! ----
	From the perspective of getting traction, you can think about working on a product in three phases: Phase I  making something people want Phase II  marketing something people want Phase III  scaling your business Phase I is very product focused and involves pursuing initial traction while also building your initial product. This often means getting traction in ways that don't scale giving talks, writing guest posts, emailing people you have relationships with, attending conferences and doing whatever you can to get in front of customers. As Paul Graham said in his essay  Do Things that Don't Scale : If you've made it to phase II, you have a product that resonates with customers initial traction and therefore doesn't require sweeping product changes. In other words, in phase II you have established product/market fit and now are fine-tuning your positioning and marketing messages. In phase III, you have an established business model, a significant position in the market, and are focused on scaling both to further dominate the market and to profit. At different product phases, moving the needle means different things. In Phase I, it's getting those first few customers. In phase II, it is getting enough customers where you're knocking on the door of sustainability. And, in phase III, your focus is on increasing your earnings, scaling your marketing channels, and creating a truly sustainable business. Some traction channels will move the needle early on, but will fail to work later. Others are hard to get working in phase I, but are major sources of traction in the later phases (PR is a good example). On the other hand, some channels will be great in phase I but useless in phases II and III because they simply don't have the volume required to move the needle. When you're just starting out, small things can move the needle in terms of traction. A single tweet from a well-respected individual or a speech to a few hundred people at a meetup can result in a meaningful jump in users. As your company grows, smaller things like that will be difficult to notice. If you have 10,000 visitors to your website each day, it will be hard to appreciate a tweet or blog post that sends 200 visitors your way. As your startup sees more traction, things that worked early on may not scale well (or be worth scaling). What moves the needle changes dramatically. Moving the needle in the later stages requires larger and larger numbers. If you want to add 100,000 new customers, with conversion rates between 15%, you're looking at reaching 210 million people  those are huge numbers! That's why traction channels like community building and viral marketing can be so powerful: they scale with the size of your userbase and potential market. In other words, the way you get traction will change. After your growth curve flattens, what worked before usually will not get you to the next level. On the flip side, traction channels that seemed like long shots before might be worth reconsidering during your next growth phase. But, how do you go about figuring out what channels will drive your next growth phase? How do you figure out your customer acquisition channel? With so many channels to consider, figuring out which one to focus on is tough. That's why we've created a simple framework called Bullseye that will help you find the channel that will get you traction. As billionaire PayPal founder and early Facebook investor Peter Thiel put it : We use a Bullseye metaphor in our framework because you're aiming for the Bullseyethe one traction channel that will unlock your next growth stage. Using Bullseye to find your channel is a five-step process: brainstorm, rank, prioritize, test, and focus on what works. Rinse, repeat. Step 1: Brainstorm The goal in brainstorming is to come up with reasonable ways you might use each traction channel. If you were to advertise offline, where would be the best place to do it? If you were to give a speech, who would be the ideal audience? Everyone approaches the 19 traction channels with biases. This first step is meant to help you systematically counteract your channel biases. That is, it is important that you not dismiss any traction channel in this step. You should be able to think of at least one idea for every channel  that's brainstorming! In terms of research to feed your brainstorm, you should know what marketing strategies have worked in your industry, as well as the history of companies in your space. It's especially important to understand how similar companies acquired customers over time, and how unsuccessful companies wasted their marketing dollars. Some other questions you may want to consider:
	Of course, you won't know the right answers to all these questions, but you can make educated guesses. Step 2: Rank The ranking step helps you organize your brainstorming efforts. It also helps you start to think a bit more critically about the traction channels in aggregate. Place each of the traction channels into one of three columns, with each column representing a concentric circle in the Bullseye: The research you did and ideas you came up with in the brainstorm step should guide your rankings. Usually, a few ideas you thought of will seem particularly compelling  these traction channels belong in column A. Channels with ideas that seem like they could plausibly work go in column B. Channels with only ideas that seem like more of a stretch would belong in column C.
	Step 3: Prioritize Now identify your inner circle: the three traction channels that seem most promising. If you already have three channels in Column A, you're done! If you have more than three, then you need to get rid of some and vice-versa. It is often the case that there are a few truly exciting and promising channels that emerge from ranking, but not a lot. Draw the line where there is an obvious drop-off in excitement. That drop-off often occurs around the third channel. We want you to have more than one channel in your inner circle because we don't want you to waste valuable time finding your successful traction channel by testing channels sequentially when you can do so equally well in parallel. You can run multiple experiments at the same time since tests take some time to run after they've been set up. Yet doing too many things in parallel leads to errors from lack of focus, which means the number needs to be somewhat low. Step 4: Test The testing step is where you put your ideas into the real world. The goal of this step is to find out which of the traction channels in your inner circle is worth focusing on. You will make that decision based on results from a series of relatively cheap tests. These tests should be designed to answer the following questions: These questions are very similar to the columns we suggested making in the brainstorm step. 


When testing, you are replacing your educated guesses with real answers. Keep in mind that, when testing, you are not trying to get a lot of traction with a channel just yet. Instead, you are simply trying to determine if it's a channel that could work for your startup. Your main consideration at this point is speed to get data and prove out your assumptions. You want to design smaller scale tests that don't require much up-front cost or effort. For example, run four Facebook ads vs. forty. You should be able to get a rough idea of a channel's effectiveness with just a few hundred dollars. Step 5: Focusing If all goes well, one of the traction channels you tested in your inner circle produced promising results. In that case, you should start directing your traction efforts and resources towards that most promising channel. At any stage in a startup's lifecycle, one traction channel dominates in terms of customer acquisition. 


That is why we suggest focusing on one at a time, and only after you've identified a channel that seems like it could actually work. The goal of this focusing step is quite simple: to wring every bit of traction out of the traction channel. To do so, you will be continually experimenting to find out exactly how to optimize growth in your chosen channel. As you dive deeper into it, you will uncover effective tactics and do everything you can to scale them until they are no longer effective due to saturation or rising costs. Bullseye is designed to be a straightforward way to direct your traction focus and maximize your results. First and foremost, it forces you to take all the traction channels more seriously than you would otherwise. This is accomplished via the brainstorm step and then again by forcing you to think about all of the channels through the rank and prioritize steps. These steps systematically uncover strategies for getting traction that you wouldn't have found using other approaches. The framework is also meant to help you zoom in on the best ideas as quickly and cheaply as possible, while still casting a wide net: hence the Bullseye metaphor. Noah Kagan talked to us about how he used a version of Bullseye at Mint, a site that helps you track your finances and was acquired by Intuit for $170 million. Their initial traction goal was 100,000 users in the first six months after launch. In steps 13, Noah and his team brainstormed and picked several traction channels that seemed promising (targeting blogs, PR, search engine marketing) to focus on in their inner circle. In step 4, they then ran a series of cheap tests in each (sponsored a small newsletter, reached out to financial celebrities like Suze Orman, placed some Google ads) to see what worked and what didn't. In step 5, after running these experiments, Mint focused on the traction channel that seemed most promising and that could reach their goal. In this case, that meant targeting blogs. In the early days, the tactics of sponsoring mid-level bloggers in the financial niche and guest posting allowed them to acquire their first 40,000 customers. When this channel maxed out, they repeated the Bullseye process, and found a new traction channel to focus on: public relations. Within 6 months of launching, they had 1 million users. We heard stories like this over and over again when talking to successful startup founders. They would research many channels, try a few, and focus on the most promising until it stopped working. Bullseye is designed to systemize this successful process. Use it!
	

	 I've just finished reading Traction - How any startup can achieve explosive customer growth by Gabriel Weinberg & Justin Mares, and it was a very interesting reminder of channels to test before deciding on the perfect fit for your business. This article is a short walk-through the entire 19 channels and some to-do's good to have in mind. Although the book was on my list for quite some time, what enticed me to read it was Gabriel's story behind DuckDuckGo and Justin's course about how to become a Technical Marketer . Long story show, with nineteen traction channels to consider, figuring out which one to focus on is tough. So Gabriel & Justin created a simple framework called Bullseye that will help you & me find the channel that will generate traction.